This is going to be your personal opinion, but I'm
trying to build up a consensus, if there is one, by
adding up personal opinion. What do you think the
taxpayers and the general public in this country
think of planetary astronomy in particular and
just astronomy in general? I think the public's
very interested in astronomy, and to the average
person on the street, planetary astronomy is
probably most of astronomy. I mean, they've heard
a lot from Sagan. which emphasizes, although not
exclusively, planetary astronomy. And they see
stuff in the media frequently on sexy things like
black holes, but they don't understand them. On
the other hand, if you show them a picture of
Jupiter or a satellite of the outer solar system or
a volcano on Mars, they'll figure out quite
quickly where it was, how that image was obtained,
and maybe in some cases be able to tell you why
they'd like to see more. So I think, in fact, it's
extremely important for science in this country
to continue the planetary program with vigor. Do
you think the public ought to have that view? Sure.
Why not? It doesn't matter. It's close. It's
easier to touch. You can see Jupiter at night and
recognize it. You know, to point out to your kids
that it's not just a star, but it's a big, giant,
gaseous world with little planets around it. Why
not? Here's another two-part question. And your
point's probably fairly important here. Do you
think planetary astronomers have done a good job
of selling themselves to the public and Congress?
And do you think that astronomers as a whole have
done a good job doing that? It's hard to answer. The
second one I can answer, recently I think there's
been some counter examples or examples of
negative salesmanship, bickering. to Congress
trying to go pork and anti-pork for things like the
Gemini project, probably quite
counterproductive. So politicizing future
projects with NSF and NASA as a funding agency is
probably a bad idea. As far as planetary astronomy
being successful, well, you'd like to think so. On
the other hand, look at the number of missions
planned and canceled of late. So in fact, from that
aspect, despite the fact that these things are
moderately inexpensive compared to manned
exploration of near-Earth environment or
anything else. They aren't getting full funding.
It's just a tough time for space science, I
suppose. We've both done some optical and some
radio astronomy.
First of all, radio astronomy never had a sneering
attitude towards planetary work. Now, is this
just because the planets were bright sources that
could be identified? Or was it because both of them
in the 50s had this pariah status? Well, the radio
astronomer, I'm not sure the radio astronomers
had pariah status. They were just regarded as
different because their backgrounds weren't...
Engineers. They were engineers, and they
certainly knew how to use, you know, slide rule
and... some electronic test equipment.
Soldering iron. It's definitely a soldering iron
and plenty of solder. I wasn't completely
scorned. I don't know. No, I think they were
treated differently. They may have been not
mainstream, but I don't think they were
particularly pariahs. And as far as planetary
astronomy making an impact, as soon as Jupiter was
just slightly beyond discovered at low frequency
from the first radiation by Franklin and Burt,
right? Then Venus got detected, I think, in 56 or 57
first. No one believed it quite that fast. With a
high brightness temperature, and after a little
while, we realized that that wouldn't go away, and
you had to figure out what the reason was. So that
played a big role around 1960, plus or minus three,
on each side of 1960, in the development of
planetary physics. How come with this future
planning and tenure plans and all this sort of
stuff, the radio astronomers always seem to have
their fights and their bloodlettings behind
locked doors and come out with a unified thing,
whereas the optical people stage public
spectacles? It's so painful. Why does this always
continue? I mean, I've heard this repeated many
times. I don't know the answer. I mean, it's a
sensible part of science to disagree on technical
details. That's normal. but you're not supposed
to involve Congress in it. Which doesn't
understand the technical details in general.
Definitely not, and probably doesn't care. And
once they hear some argument, they figure, oh,
both of these sides are quite silly, and let's
listen to them for a few minutes and go on to
something more serious. Yeah, I don't know the
answer to that, but it does seem to always be the
case. I would have thought we'd got over that 10
years ago. I mean, even the high-energy
physicists have gotten their act together, which
with that bunch of, Queen Bee seems incredible.
Yeah, I don't know how black and white the
situation is. I'm pretty unplugged to that, but
certainly ever since I got to think about
astropolitics, it's always been the case that the
radio astronomers have been well enough prepared
in advance that they had a chance to get something
while the optical folks bit and scratched, mostly
scratched each other pretty badly, yeah. With
some exceptions, I mean the National Observatory
in the early days at least went quickly from an 0.9
to a 2.1 to 2.4 meter telescopes, but after that
it's pretty much turned off.
Planetary astronomy found out a lot of things
about the solar system in the last 30 years. All you
have to do is compare Baker's 7th edition or
something like that and it's just a whole
different solar system. Do you think that's
really changed the way the general public thinks
about anything? I've got a whole list here, the way
they've thought about Earth, solar system, the
universe, planetary astronomy, astronomy. Can
you be more explicit? I mean, give me an example.
Has it really changed the way
people think about, well, for example, science?
Do you think that all these discoveries have made
people say, hey, these scientists can really do
something and can really find out stuff? I think
they've thought that that's the case. since World
War II. I think the application of science to the
conflict, World War II and the Cold War, told
people that science was important, if not
necessarily completely without
disqualification or sin. There's been a lot of, I
don't know if you want to call it
pseudo-philosophical comments to the effect
that now that we can get out and see that Earth is
just one little planet among others and all this
sort of stuff. Do you think that's really affected
the general public?
Slightly from the ecological point of view, but
not enormously. I think the lumber companies are
still quite happy to cut all the old growth and the
owls be damned.
Okay, 30 years ago there was still a chance that
there was life on Mars. And now we've been to all the
major planets except Pluto, and no evidence so far
of any life on any planet, particularly no little
green men on Mars, not even a bug. Do you think
that's had any effect on funding and public
interest for planetary astronomy, astronomy,
and science in general? I don't think so. I don't
think so. Anyway, we haven't explored Jupiter
thoroughly, right? I mean, there's still
possibilities for floaters. Of course, the
alternative is if they would have found one
microbe on Mars... We'd be standing there now
probably. Oh, yeah, no, no, that's true. I mean,
certainly if the results had been very, very
different from Vikings, more or less negative
results, that we'd want to track it down or
certainly make sure it wasn't something we
carried along. Yep, hitchhikers are welcome.
Yes, I agree with what you're saying. But I don't
think it's had an enormously negative effect
because I think most people are. slightly cynical
and didn't really expect to see much. It would have
been interesting if they had found fossils. Hard
to do with the experiments on. We don't know that.
We still may. Of course, the only two lander pros
were landed for engineering reasons.
Absolutely. They're lousy places to look for
anything interesting because they don't have
previous water flow history. Now,
unfortunately, this question that I that I wrote
down here, it says your institution, but Lick is
now separate from Berkeley, but isn't in all
the... Lick is a statewide institution, per se.
It's called Organized Research Unit, and it
serves all campuses. Okay, well then let's just
take Berkeley here. You mentioned how Carl came
here for a while and got interest started, and you
still have some interest in planetary astronomy.
Do you have any planetary astronomy group here or
anything like that? Not really a group, but Imke de
Potter is very interested and works... almost
full-time on planetary problems, radio mostly,
radio magnetospheres, radio thermal radiation
from all the planets. She's had a student who just
finished a thesis on the thermal radiation from
Mercury is measured radio interferometry. So
there's a bit going on. Also, the geology
department would like to be in it. They're not
quite sure how to do that. So there's interest in
geology, but nothing much yet to show for it. How
come this place never developed a strong
planetary thing, just other things? Just breaks
of the game, a lot of strong people in other fields.
It's hard to cover every base. We don't have much in
solar either. But never any implied attitude that
you shouldn't do that? No, no. Okay. What do you
think the taxpayers got out of the money they
funneled into the space program over there? the
past 30 years as far as planetary astronomy goes?
Oh, a lot, because it's a wonderful frontier. More
in planetary, more tangible stuff in planetary
than anything else. And we can point to moon rocks
and say, hey, if you're interested, we'll tell you
how old that rock is. That rock is older than
anything you walked on. Probably. Probably. So,
yeah, I think they've done reasonably well. I
mean, you know, it's hard to justify the bucks for a
launch, but what can you do? So I think they've
gotten a lot of thrills, too. Do you think
planetary astronomy is a real... accepted now by
most other astronomers? Most. Most. Still a few
holdouts. Maybe. Not that many. But, you know, I
don't like all kinds of astronomy. Some I know
there, but there's some things I wouldn't bother
to do. A lot of people have been getting a lot of
mileage lately in the, quote, planetary,
unquote, field. I just wrote down four things
here. There might be more. One is the search for
extraterrestrial intelligence. One is search
for other solar systems. Another one is the hole in
Earth's ozone layer, and one finding
and deflecting killer asteroids and comets. You
think they've overdone that? Well, not that much.
I mean, the ozone hole is real, right? So you hardly
want to see your grandchildren have to wear a
Dodger hat every time they go out in the sun in 20
years. So that's something that clearly is a
man-made situation which can be probably
improved by ecological care in the future. So
that's probably, of these, the most important
thing. SETI is the most whimsical, but still has a
small outside chance of success. And there, of
course, the stakes are very large. So it's like a
lottery. And that would be exciting. And I'd be
somewhat cynical about the chances for instant
success, but who knows? Killer asteroids? The
statistics are fairly straightforward that
there are asteroidal impacts that are going to
release a lot of kinetic energy. Certainly going
to ruin the Tuesday tea party. Right, so that's
fine whether you can deflect them or want to
deflect them if we knew enough how to do that. It's a
different constituency, which might not be my
favorite fans. Other solar systems are likely
events, and we don't quite know how to find them.
When you can find a dust cloud around Beta
Pictoris, that's fine. Whether that really has
anything to do with another solar system is
unknown, but it's a kind of lead we would like to
follow up in a variety of ways. So looking, for
example, for objects of few Jovian masses by radio
velocities of the parent star are projects going
on now which are quite worthwhile and don't tap the
resources very deeply and should continue.
Chances of success are hard to measure, but
probably pretty good. Here's a question, and I
think you can put them together, because both
planetary astronomers and regular astronomers
are complaining about the budget crunch, but of
course there's even now vastly more money per
astronomer available than there was in the late
1950s, right? Yeah, because then there wasn't
any. We learned to do without. But that wasn't so
good. I mean, you know, use it up, wear it out, make
it do. We learned that. And that's not necessarily
the most efficient way to proceed. It does make you
self-reliant. But what do you think about, and
I'll lump together planetary astronomy with
astronomy, because if somebody pulls the plug in a
bathtub, all the little rubber duckies are going
to ground.
What's the state of it today? Plateau? Seems like a
plateau, but the problem... is the number of
people who want money are increasing and
expectations are increasing sort of
proportional to the prospects in the field, which
are good. So it's a disappointment in the sense
that our expectations get higher all the time. So
the exponent is greater than one. Yeah, I think so.
And, well, would you agree that it just can't keep
increasing at the rate it's been doing, say,
during the 70s or during the 60s? Yeah, there it was
very high, but it could increase a little bit. Keep
us from fighting among ourselves all the time for
the remaining scraps. There are more
degree-granting institutions than ever and more
new PhDs than ever. How long can that go on? Not
forever. We've got more than we need. Right. I
mean, you just can't employ them all gainfully.
Also, there's a rather substantial influx of
astronomers from other fields. So it isn't just
that we're training too many PhDs, but the field is
successful. So the numbers I've heard quoted
around recently is something like 135, roughly,
PhDs per year in astronomy. And there aren't
nearly that many positions. So they often go into
postdocs as a holding position for some years. On
the other hand, the number of people calling
themselves astronomers or becoming members of
AAS increases at about twice that rate. So it must
mean an influx from physics and other associated
fields. So even if we were to cut back enormously on
productivity of new PhDs, it wouldn't completely
solve the problem.
We forgot to go into some detail about Gerard de
Bacallure, who was unusual in that he did
planetary and galaxy research. Right. He walked
both sides of the street in a very unusual way in the
1950s, 60s, and even later. He was a good advocate
of planetary astronomy. wrote a good book on Mars,
which was a distillation of many observations.
Not all of them survived, but it was influential.
And he did very good stuff on galaxies, probably
was one of the leader in statistical work on galaxy
properties from Hubble's death to maybe 1970.
Quite an impressive guy to be able to do that that
well. So I shouldn't have omitted him earlier.
Certainly he was a well-respected person that
could do either. Well, we just noticed that when
you applied for telescope time at McDonald in
early 1963, de Bacalura wrote you a letter dated
February 4, 1963, in which he said there's a good
possibility of JPL buying time at McDonald
Observatory. And he sounded quite favorable.
Right. So I'm not sure what happened next.
Obviously, it never panned out. It was never a
penny spent. He recommends that you send a formal
application to Dr. W.W. Morgan at Yerkes
Observatory. And then here's the next letter
saying, in a famous phrase we both remember, a
famous sentence, I regret to have to inform you
that the observing program for the McDonald
82-inch is saturated.
And? I would have supposed that you would have made
arrangements through Caltech to obtain
observing time locally. These were very
frustrating times. It's interesting that Morgan
actually was a nicer guy than I thought at the time.
So I don't think he was particularly mad at me. It's
interesting that just a year and a half later,
McDonald completely opened up to planetary work.
Yes, right. But it wasn't because of either of
those people, although DeVocalor certainly
wouldn't have minded. No, that was Smitty's
influence, which had an enormous positive change
there.